Interaction of high intensity focused 
ultrasound with biological materials 

Ajit Mal, Feng Feng, Michael Kabo, Yoseph Bar-Cohen and Jeffrey Wang 

Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering Department 
University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1 597 

e-mail: ai it@u,ucla.cdu 

Abstract: 

ABSTRACT 

This  work  is  motivated  by  the  possible  medical  application  of  focused ultrasound  in 
minimally  invasive  treatment of  a  variety  of disorders including those  associated with 
soft tissue or disk element disruption in the vicinity of the spine causing impingement on 
the spinal cord. The hypothesis is that thermal spikes induced by focused ultrasound will 
cause  the  tissues  to  shrink  and  thus  restore  stability  to  the  spine  and/or  reverse  the 
weakness in the  structural element. A prototype setup consisting of a transducer in the 
shape  of  a  spherical  cap  was  used  to  conduct  tests  on  biological  materials.  Our 
preliminary results  indicate that  the  heating  efficiency of the  ultrasound  energy  in  the 
focal  region  depends  on  the  exciting  frequency  and  the  geometry  of  the  focal  zone 
depends on the material being tested. We have investigated the influence of the exciting 
frequency, system geometry and the specimen’s material properties on the nature of low- 
energy focused ultrasonic wavefield using a finite element based program called Pzflex. 
The preliminary results of our laboratory experiments and the numerical simulations are 
presented  in  this  paper.  At  higher  excitation energies, cavitation and nonlinear  effects 
need to be included in the simulations.  These effects are under current investigation. 

Keywords: focused ultrasound, HFU, PZFlex. 

1. INTRODUCTION 

In the  1940’s, the interaction between high intensity focused ultrasound (HFU) and biological matters has 
In  the  1950’s,  William  and  Fry  developed  the  first  refined  ultrasonic  system  for 
been  reported  [‘I. 
therapeutic applications.  However,  the  wide  spread use  of  therapeutic ultrasound  in  clinics has  yet  to 
materialize.  More research still needed to be done in this area. Previous works involved using experimental 
to collect the mechanical and thermal data in animal tissue, transducers design, development of 
methods [’I 
theoretical methods [3s4*51 to calculate heat distribution along the axis of the model, and numerical methods 
such as FEM 

to model therapeutic ultrasound. 

To understand the  effect of therapeutic ultrasound, we have to analyze the  changes in  tissue by  the 
thermal andor mechanical effects of ultrasound.  Lately, the use of thermal effects in ultrasound represents 
the  majority  of  the  ultrasonic  application.  They  are  used  for  cancer  therapy,  birthmark  removal,  and 
surgeries in the eye and the heart. 

Although more  and  more  ultrasound  is  being  used  in  clinical situations, the  theory  and  supporting 
technical knowledge  is  still lacking.  For example,  in  order to  treat  a narrow target area with  minimal 
damage to the surrounding tissue, it is necessary to predict the path of the high-intensity ultrasound beam 
from the  transducer to  the  target.  It  is  expensive to  solve this problem by  experimental methods,  since 
study using living tissue is impractical, and cost prohibitive.  Tissues in the body have complex geometry 

and its acoustic characteristics are not currently well defined, especially for transmission of high amplitude 
and  high  frequency waves.  As  for  theoretical solution,  the  PDEs  could  not  be  used  to  solve  for  the 
theoretical solutions for all case. 

In  this study, PZFlex is used to model the problem and calculate the numerical solution.  PZFlex is 
widely used for designing transducer [61,  calculating the mechanical effect of the ultrasound on tissue  [71, 
modeling the therapeutic ultrasound [*I  and calculating thermal effect of high-frequency ultrasound [91.  For 
this  reason, PZFlex  is  a useful  tool  in  understanding the  engineering, biological and  clinical aspects of 
therapeutic ultrasound. 

In  this  paper, the  mechanical effect and the  thermal effect caused by  high-frequency ultrasound in 
different material systems are calculated.  The pressure distribution generated by a focused ultrasound is 
shown graphically.  The temperature distribution in 2-D is calculated by using PZFlex.  A simple uniformly 
loaded, focused generator with  spherical geometry can  not generate the  highest temperature in  the  body 
contained with different biomaterials.  Finally, the direction of future research is discussed. 

2. PLANE WAVE TESTING 

First, the mechanical effect of plane wave ultrasound passing through a thin solid cell layer between 
two  different fluids is  considered.  The theoretical solution and the  numerical FEM  solution of  the  cell 
problem are  compared to  the  solution generated by  theoretical methods.  The  reflection by  the  second 
interface is extracted in a model that has three different layers of material (two fluid and one solid). In this 
section, the solid materials are modeled as elastic materials with no damping. 

2.1 Cell Problem 

The  mechanical  effect  of  the  ultrasound  is  calculated  for  the  symmetric  (SYMM)  and  absorbed 
(ABSR)  boundaries  condition  set  by  the  PZFlex  program.  The  problem  of  therapeutic  ultrasound 
calculation is complex and generally the infinitely large-scale is considered while ignoring the boundaries. 
For  FEM  modeling,  some  displacement  and  stress  boundary  condition  should  be  defined  in  ABSR 
boundary to simulate this kind of problems.  This kind of boundary will not cause any reflection if material 
is homogenous.  The mechanical effect created by the ultrasound is then calculated and plotted in 2-D gray 
equivalence graphics to show the pressure distribution.  Finally, theoretical solution are compared to the of 
the FEM result. 

(1) Problem description: 

The  modeling  of  the  problem  is  shown  in  Figl.1.  From  top  to  bottom,  the  total  length  of  the 
propagating direction (x-direction) is 0.05 mm.  The thickness of fluid layer, cell layer and water layer are 
0.025 mm, 0.01 mm,  and 0.015 mm respectively.  The width is 0.01 mm (y-direction). The stress is loaded 
on  the top  surface of  the  fluid with  the  amplitude normalized to  1. Tablel-1  gives the  properties of the 
materials. A 2 GHz frequency ultrasound is used for the calculation. 

Table1 -1 
Material 

Fluid 
Cell 
Water 

Density 

1050 
1000 

Pro  erties of materials 

1800 
1500 

80 

(2) Theoretical solution: 

The pressures at the interface between layers are calculated by using theoretical method.  We can solve 
for the solution by using FFT method to transform the problem from time domain to frequency domain.  In 
the frequency domain, the displacement for the top layer is 

(1) 

w I ( w )  = e-jkIx +R . eiklx , 

where  ki = - , 

w 

( c p  ) i  

( c , ) ~  is the velocity of the P-wave in the i"  layer material, 

The  positive  direction  of  x-direction  is  shown  in  Fig.l.1  and  the  origin  is  located  at  the  interface 

between the fluid and the cell. The displacement in the cell and water are 

where  h  is the thickness of the cell.  A, B , R  and c are constants. 

Substitute the  continuous conditions of stresses and displacements at the two  interfaces. A  system of 

equations (4) is obtained and the unknown coefficient C can be obtained. 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

w is the angular frequency, 

-ik2X  + g e ; k 2 x  

w,(w) = Ae 
w3 (w) = c e - i k 3 ( X - h )  

(1+R = A + B  
- 1 + R = Z 2 ,  ( - A  + B )  
A e - i k l h   + Be-W  = c 

' 

i k ~ h  + ~ ~ - i k ' h  

= -Z3,C 

I 

where 

- ~ ~ -

2.. = 

!I 

Pi ( c p  ) i  

P j ( c p ) j   ' 

Solving the system of equations, we get 
_ 4 p  

C =  -e2ik2h  - z  e2iklh  - z  e2iklh  - z z e2ik  h 

32 

32 

21 

21 

and, 

- 1 + z 2 1  

"32 

-'32'2l 

' 

On the interface between Cell and water, where  X  = h , then, 
Z x  = -imp3 ( c ~ ) ~  
The stress near the interface ( X  = 0 ) between the fluid and the cell is, 

C , 

-ik,X 

w = e  
Normalized F x  by  Eo, we got, 

Now, applied the source load on the top of the fluid. The source is described as a function 
f ( r )   = 19.0 x exp(-1.67 x 1 09t)-19.0 x exp(-1.9 x 1 0'  t) , 
Transform it into frequency domain, then get 

F(w) = 

4.87 x 10' 

(iw+l.67 x 10' )( iw + 1.92 x 10')  ' 

In frequency domain, the stress on the interface between cell and water under the described uniform 

sourcefit) will be 

Finally, we get the numerical solution of the stress on  the interface between cell and water by  using 

o(t) = ZFFT(FF(w)) as shown in Fig. 1.4. 

(3) FEM results: 

The 2-D pressure distribution at three given times is shown in Fig.  1.2.  The result of pressure history 
at a single point solved using FEM is shown in Figl.3 while the theoretical result is shown in Fig. 1.4.  The 

same curve and behavior can be seen when compared to the results.  This demonstrates that the PZFlex is a 
valid simulation method and can solve more complex problem that cannot be (or are not easily) solved by 
experimental or theoretical methods. 

Fig 1 .l Model of problem 

tion 

(a) Source pressure 

(b) Pressure at a given point 

Figl.3 Pressure history calculated by PZFlex 

2.2 Extracting the reflection signal 

layer materials system shown in Figl.5. 

A new model is considered here. A high frequency pressure is loaded on the left hand side in a three 

FEE-e"E- 

- ___. 

.  -  - -  - 

mru. m u *  * lis 
___. .__ 

Figl.5 Model of the problem 

The ultrasound has a frequency 500 kHz and amplitude of 1. The reflection by the second interface is 
considered at the center point in  the first layer.  Using PZFlex, we can  easily get the numerical solution. 
The properties of individual layers are listed in Table 1-2. 

Table 1-2 

Properties of materials 

Material 

Density 

I 

Aluminum 

Back Material 

Water 

2600 
1180 
1000 

CP 

2800 
2470 
1500 

C. 

1300 
1080 

0 

And after numerical calculation, the pressure distribution in  2-D at two different times are shown in 

Fig. 1.6. 

Fig  1.6 Pressure distributions (reflections by first layer and second one) 

The time history of the pressure at the center point is shown in Figl.7. 

Fig 1.7 Extracted signal reflected by second layer 

2. FOCUSED ULTRASOUND 

In order to leam more about mechanical effect and thermal effect of the ultrasound, the simplest way 
is to use a focused ultrasound.  From the study of optics, the focused lens can congregate a parallel beam in 
to a point at higher energy than an uniform beam  ['I, 
the  mechanical effect of the Ultrasound  in  a single 
material by  a uniform load and a phase delayed load that  simulates focused ultrasounds is compared by 
using  PZFlex FEM  analysis.  In this section, the focused ultrasound is used and the mechanical effect is 
considered for three cases. 

2.1 Focused wave in two layers materials 

In the problem shown in Fig. 2.1,  the pressure caused by  a focused pressure field is calculated. The 
materials used are water and aluminum. The mechanical properties are listed in  Table 2- 1. The part above 
the black  line is water and the rest is aluminum.  The angle of lens is 60"  and the radius of the lens is 30 
mm. The focal point of the lens is marked by the symbol "+"  in the figure. The thickness of the water layer 
is 8 mm. The width and length of model is 60 mm. The frequency used is 500 kHz. The amplitude of the 
input pressure  is  normalized to  one. All  of  the  boundaries are  ABSR  boundaries (all the  energy passes 
through the boundary as if this is in an infinity body). 

Fig 2.1 The model of problem 

Material 

~ 

Aluminum 

Water 

I  Density 
I 
2700 
1000 

CLl 

6400 
1500 

cs 

3200 

0 

(a)  In aluminium 

(b) In water 

Fig 2.2 “focal points” 

2.2 Unsymmetric geometry analysis 

Consider the case where the lens is unsynunetric to the biological materials, a focused point could not 
be made using PZFlex FEM simulation. The model and results are shown in Fig 2.3(a), Fig 2.3(b) and (c). 
The materials’ properties are listed in Table 2-1. 

(a) Slated lens 

(b) Interaction on the interface 

(c) wave IS scattered 

Fig2.3 slated lens modeling 

Here, the angle of the lens is  60" , The angle between y-axis and the start edge of the lens is 30". High 
frequency pressure  is  uniformly  loaded  on  the  sphere  surface of  lens. The  frequency is  500  kHz,  and 
amplitude is normalized to one. In Fig. 2.3, the energy is divided into three parts.  The first part is reflected 
by the interface, the second part goes along the interface and the third part is scattered. 

2.3 Thin bone problem 

A thin bone is placed in the water along with the focused lens. The mechanical effect of the ultrasound 
is calculated in the model shown in Fig. 2.4. The black arc is the lens, the middle layer is the bone, and the 
rest is water. 

Fig 2.4 Model of problem 

The angle of lens is 60"  and the radius of lens is 30 mm. The thickness of bone is 8 mm. The distance 
between the  edges of  lens to  top surface of the bone  is  5 mm.  The  input high  frequency pressure has a 
frequency of 500 kHz and unit amplitude. 

The result shows that after the ultrasound passed through the thin bone, it will be refocused. From the 
theory of optics, after the wave passed through the thin bone, and when the wave comes into water again, 
the angle direction is corrected. 

Fig 2.5 Refocused point 

Now, a new problem is introduced.  For clinical application, the focus point should be in the body and 
not in the water. If the third layer material is changed from water to another material different from water, 
the material of second layer, what would be the behavior of the pressure distribution in the concerned layer 
and  how  can the  path  of the ultrasound be  corrected to  get  the  focus point?  From  the  thermal  section, 
which will be discussed next, a strip area along the symmetric axis of lens is heated.  This area has as high 
a temperature as in  the BAD tissue (target area). As a result, most of the surrounding tissue is damaged. 
This is an important problem urgently need attention before the ultrasound can be used widely used and be 
effectively in the clinics. In the next section, the thermal effect is discussed. 

3. THERMAL PROBLEM 

Compared the mechanical effect and thermal effect by  the therapeutic ultrasound, the thermal effect 
currently represent the majority of application for therapeutic ultrasound. In this section, a simple model is 
considered. A piece of biomaterial is placed in water, and the ultrasound lens is in water too. The thermal 
effect in biomaterial will be calculated for this simply model as well as mechanical effect. As the result of 
this problem, the temperature distribution in  2-D  at a given time is shown graphically.  The biomaterial is 
considered here as a viscoelastic material, and has higher damping and lower thermal parameters are used 
for the calculation. 

3.1 Modeling and Description 

materials are listed in Table3- 1. 

As shown in  Fig. 3.1, the model is plotted. Both the geometric parameters and the properties of the 

Material  Density 
BIOM 
Water 

3900 
1000 

cp 

1881 
1500 

c, 

0 

1038  25/1MHz 

0 

4200 
4200 

Q/Freq  Heat of Material 

Thermal Conductivities 

0.058 
0.058 

Fig 3.1 Model of thermal problem 

The lens is as the same as the one in  last problem; the radius of lens is 30 mm and the angle is  60". 
The width and length of this model are 60 mm in x and y direction.  The input ultrasound is a continuous 
wave with frequency of 1 MHz.  High amplitude is needed; the supposed amplitude is 5 M. 

3.2 Mechanical effect and Loss of energy 

The results are shown in Fig. 3.2 (a) and (b). Fig. 3.2 (a) is the steady state of the mechanical effect 
showing the pressure distribution for the continuous ultrasound wave.  Fig. 3.2 (b) is the result of the loss 
of energy. 

(a) Steady mechanical state by continuous wave 

(b) Distribution of the loss of engery 

Fig. 3.2 Pressure and loss 

A  strip area of high  loss of energy is shown in Fig3.2 (b), and all of this area will be heated to high 

temperature. 

3.3 Temperature Distribution in 2-D 

The temperature, shown in Fig.3.3 has almost the same distribution as the energy loss. A strip-shaped 
area of tissues includes the bad tissue and lots of surrounding good tissue are damaged by high temperature. 

“pr 

&&?El01 

3 70El01 

Fig 3.3 Temperature distribution in the bio-material 

4. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE RESEARCH 

Locating  the  focal  point  of  therapeutic  ultrasound  in  an  inhomogeneous  material  system  is  an 
important issue  that  needs  to  be  properly  addressed before  wider  clinical  application is possible.  The 
knowledge  gathered  not  only  can  reduce  the  amplitude  of  input  ultrasound,  but  also  reduce  possible 
damage to the surrounding tissue.  For the real clinic application, the material systems are complex.  If the 
problem is not properly dealt with, the focused wave will scatter in the human body without achieving its 
desired effect.  Lacking proper knowledge meant not being able to heat up and cause damaging to the bad 
tissue,  or  having  to  heating  a  large  area  for  long  time.  The  bubble  caused by  the  application of  high 
intensity  ultrasound  is  another  pertinent  issue.  The  effect  of  these  bubbles  to  the  thermal  effect  and 
mechanical effect of the ultrasound in  clinic situation is still unclear.  The scattering of ultrasound by air 

bubbles may  cause the  focal point to be generated in  the tissue.  This is another interesting problem that 
will be pursued in a later time. 

The research at Jet Propulsion laboratory was conducted under a contract with NASA 

5. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

REFERENCES 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

P.D. Wall, W.J. Fry, R. Stephens, D. Tucker, and J.Y.Lettvin, “Changes produced in the central 
nervous system by ultrasound,” Sci., vol, 114, pp. 686-687, 1951. 
Narendra T. Sanghvi, Francis J. Fry, Richard Bihrle, etc. “Noninvasive surgery of prostate tissue by 
high-intensity focused ultrasound,” IEEE TRA NSA CTIONS ON ULTRASONICS, FERR OELECTRICS, 
AND FREQUENCY CONTROL, vol. 43, No. 6, Nov.  1996. 
Ralf Seip, Philip VanBaren, Charles A. Cain, etc. “Noninvasive real-time multipoint termperature 
control for ultrasound phased array treatments”. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ULTRASONICS, 
FERROELECTRICS, AND FREQUENCY CONTROL, vol. 43, No. 6, Nov. 1996. 
Mehmet Bilgen, Michael F. Insana, “Effects of phase aberration on tissue heat generation and 
temperature elevation using therapeutic ultrasound”, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ULTRASONICS, 
FERROELECTRICS. AND FREQUENCY CONTROL, vol. 43, No. 6, Nov. 1996. 
Michael K. Loze, C. David Wright, “Temperature distributions in laser-heated biological tissue with 
application to birthmark removal,” Journal of Biomedical Optics 6( l), 74-58,2001. 
C.I. Zanelli, C.W. Hennige, and N.T. Sanghvi, “Design and characterization of a 10 cm annular array 
transducer for high intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU) applications,” Proc. IEEE Ultrasonic symp. 3, 
1887-1890. 1994. 
Greg Wojcik, Tom Szabo, John Mould, etc. “Nonlinear pulse calculations and data in water and a 
tissue mimic,” Proc. IEEE Ultrasonic symp. 1999. 
G. Wojcik, J.Mould, F. Lizzi, etc. “Nonlinear modeling of therapeutic ultrasound,’’ Proc. IEEE 
Ultrasonic symp. pp.  1617-1662. 1995. 
N. Abboud, J.Mould, G.Wojcik, etc. “Thermal generation, diffusion and dissipation in  1-3 
piezocompsite sonar transducers: finite element analysis and experimental measurements,” Proc. IEEE 
Ultrasonic symp. 1991. 

View publication stats
View publication stats

